<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="second-period" epub:type="part">
			<section id="first-narrative" epub:type="division">
				<section id="chapter-2-1-6" epub:type="chapter">
					<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h2>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p>(1.) “Miss Clack presents her compliments to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake; and, in sending him the fifth chapter of her humble narrative, begs to say that she feels quite unequal to enlarge as she could wish on an event so awful, under the circumstances, as Lady Verinder’s death. She has, therefore, attached to her own manuscripts, copious Extracts from precious publications in her possession, all bearing on this terrible subject. And may those Extracts (Miss Clack fervently hopes) sound as the blast of a trumpet in the ears of her respected kinsman, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p>(2.) “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake presents his compliments to Miss Clack, and begs to thank her for the fifth chapter of her narrative. In returning the extracts sent with it, he will refrain from mentioning any personal objection which he may entertain to this species of literature, and will merely say that the proposed additions to the manuscript are not necessary to the fulfilment of the purpose that he has in view.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p>(3.) “Miss Clack begs to acknowledge the return of her Extracts. She affectionately reminds <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake that she is a Christian, and that it is, therefore, quite impossible for him to offend her. Miss <abbr class="name">C.</abbr> persists in feeling the deepest interest in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blake, and pledges herself, on the first occasion when sickness may lay him low, to offer him the use of her Extracts for the second time. In the meanwhile she would be glad to know, before beginning the final chapters of her narrative, whether she may be permitted to make her humble contribution complete, by availing herself of the light which later discoveries have thrown on the mystery of the Moonstone.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p>(4.) “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake is sorry to disappoint Miss Clack. He can only repeat the instructions which he had the honour of giving her when she began her narrative. She is requested to limit herself to her own individual experience of persons and events, as recorded in her diary. Later discoveries she will be good enough to leave to the pens of those persons who can write in the capacity of actual witnesses.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p>(5.) “Miss Clack is extremely sorry to trouble <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake with another letter. Her <em>Extracts</em> have been returned, and the expression of her matured views on the subject of the Moonstone has been forbidden. Miss Clack is painfully conscious that she ought (in the worldly phrase) to feel herself put down. But, no⁠—Miss <abbr class="name">C.</abbr> has learnt perseverance in the school of adversity. Her object in writing is to know whether <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blake (who prohibits everything else) prohibits the appearance of the present correspondence in Miss Clack’s narrative? Some explanation of the position in which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blake’s interference has placed her as an authoress, seems due on the ground of common justice. And Miss Clack, on her side, is most anxious that her letters should be produced to speak for themselves.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p>(6.) “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake agrees to Miss Clack’s proposal, on the understanding that she will kindly consider this intimation of his consent as closing the correspondence between them.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p>(7.) “Miss Clack feels it an act of Christian duty (before the correspondence closes) to inform <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake that his last letter⁠—evidently intended to offend her⁠—has not succeeded in accomplishing the object of the writer. She affectionately requests <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blake to retire to the privacy of his own room, and to consider with himself whether the training which can thus elevate a poor weak woman above the reach of insult, be not worthy of greater admiration than he is now disposed to feel for it. On being favoured with an intimation to that effect, Miss <abbr class="name">C.</abbr> solemnly pledges herself to send back the complete series of her Extracts to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake.”</p>
						<footer>
							<p>[To this letter no answer was received. Comment is needless.</p>
							<p>(Signed) <em><span epub:type="z3998:sender">Drusilla Clack</span></em>]</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
