<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="second-period" epub:type="part">
			<section id="sixth-narrative" epub:type="division">
				<section id="chapter-2-6-5" epub:type="chapter">
					<h2 epub:type="title">
						<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h2>
					<p>This was the story told by your cousin (under pressure of necessity) to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker believed the story to be, as to all main essentials, true⁠—on this ground, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite was too great a fool to have invented it. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff and I agree with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker, in considering this test of the truth of the story to be a perfectly reliable one.</p>
					<p>The next question, was the question of what <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker would do in the matter of the Moonstone. He proposed the following terms, as the only terms on which he would consent to mix himself up with, what was (even in <em>his</em> line of business) a doubtful and dangerous transaction.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker would consent to lend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite the sum of two thousand pounds, on condition that the Moonstone was to be deposited with him as a pledge. If, at the expiration of one year from that date, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite paid three thousand pounds to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker, he was to receive back the Diamond, as a pledge redeemed. If he failed to produce the money at the expiration of the year, the pledge (otherwise the Moonstone) was to be considered as forfeited to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker⁠—who would, in this latter case, generously make <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey a present of certain promissory notes of his (relating to former dealings) which were then in the moneylender’s possession.</p>
					<p>It is needless to say, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey indignantly refused to listen to these monstrous terms. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker thereupon, handed him back the Diamond, and wished him good night.</p>
					<p>Your cousin went to the door, and came back again. How was he to be sure that the conversation of that evening would be kept strictly secret between his friend and himself?</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker didn’t profess to know how. If <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey had accepted his terms, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey would have made him an accomplice, and might have counted on his silence as on a certainty. As things were, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker must be guided by his own interests. If awkward inquiries were made, how could he be expected to compromise himself, for the sake of a man who had declined to deal with him?</p>
					<p>Receiving this reply, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite did, what all animals (human and otherwise) do, when they find themselves caught in a trap. He looked about him in a state of helpless despair. The day of the month, recorded on a neat little card in a box on the moneylender’s chimneypiece, happened to attract his eye. It was the twenty-third of June. On the twenty-fourth he had three hundred pounds to pay to the young gentleman for whom he was trustee, and no chance of raising the money, except the chance that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker had offered to him. But for this miserable obstacle, he might have taken the Diamond to Amsterdam, and have made a marketable commodity of it, by having it cut up into separate stones. As matters stood, he had no choice but to accept <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker’s terms. After all, he had a year at his disposal, in which to raise the three thousand pounds⁠—and a year is a long time.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker drew out the necessary documents on the spot. When they were signed, he gave <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite two cheques. One, dated June 23rd, for three hundred pounds. Another, dated a week on, for the remaining balance seventeen hundred pounds.</p>
					<p>How the Moonstone was trusted to the keeping of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker’s bankers, and how the Indians treated <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey (after that had been done) you know already.</p>
					<p>The next event in your cousin’s life refers again to Miss Verinder. He proposed marriage to her for the second time⁠—and (after having being accepted) he consented, at her request, to consider the marriage as broken off. One of his reasons for making this concession has been penetrated by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff. Miss Verinder had only a life interest in her mother’s property⁠—and there was no raising the twenty thousand pounds on <em>that</em>.</p>
					<p>But you will say, he might have saved the three thousand pounds, to redeem the pledged Diamond, if he had married. He might have done so certainly⁠—supposing neither his wife, nor her guardians and trustees, objected to his anticipating more than half of the income at his disposal, for some unknown purpose, in the first year of his marriage. But even if he got over this obstacle, there was another waiting for him in the background. The lady at the Villa, had heard of his contemplated marriage. A superb woman, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blake, of the sort that are not to be trifled with⁠—the sort with the light complexion and the Roman nose. She felt the utmost contempt for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite. It would be silent contempt, if he made a handsome provision for her. Otherwise, it would be contempt with a tongue to it. Miss Verinder’s life interest allowed him no more hope of raising the “provision” than of raising the twenty thousand pounds. He couldn’t marry⁠—he really couldn’t marry, under all the circumstances.</p>
					<p>How he tried his luck again with another lady, and how <em>that</em> marriage also broke down on the question of money, you know already. You also know of the legacy of five thousand pounds, left to him shortly afterwards, by one of those many admirers among the soft sex whose good graces this fascinating man had contrived to win. That legacy (as the event has proved) led him to his death.</p>
					<p>I have ascertained that when he went abroad, on getting his five thousand pounds, he went to Amsterdam. There he made all the necessary arrangements for having the Diamond cut into separate stones. He came back (in disguise), and redeemed the Moonstone, on the appointed day. A few days were allowed to elapse (as a precaution agreed to by both parties) before the jewel was actually taken out of the bank. If he had got safe with it to Amsterdam, there would have been just time between July ‘forty-nine, and February ‘fifty (when the young gentleman came of age) to cut the Diamond, and to make a marketable commodity (polished or unpolished) of the separate stones. Judge from this, what motives he had to run the risk which he actually ran. It was “neck or nothing” with him⁠—if ever it was “neck or nothing” with a man yet.</p>
					<p>I have only to remind you, before closing this Report, that there is a chance of laying hands on the Indians, and of recovering the Moonstone yet. They are now (there is every reason to believe) on their passage to Bombay, in an East Indiaman. The ship (barring accidents) will touch at no other port on her way out; and the authorities at Bombay (already communicated with by letter, overland) will be prepared to board the vessel, the moment she enters the harbour.</p>
					<p>I have the honour to remain, dear sir, your obedient servant, <em>Richard Cuff</em> (late sergeant in the Detective Force, Scotland Yard, London).<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="note-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
