<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="second-period" epub:type="part">
			<section id="sixth-narrative" epub:type="division">
				<section id="chapter-2-6-4" epub:type="chapter">
					<h2 epub:type="title">
						<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h2>
					<p>Late on the evening of Friday, the twenty-third of June (‘forty-eight), <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker was surprised by a visit from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite. He was more than surprised, when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey produced the Moonstone. No such Diamond (according to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker’s experience) was in the possession of any private person in Europe.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite had two modest proposals to make, in relation to this magnificent gem. First, Would <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker be so good as to buy it? Secondly, Would <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker (in default of seeing his way to the purchase) undertake to sell it on commission, and to pay a sum down, on the anticipated result?</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker tested the Diamond, weighed the Diamond and estimated the value of the Diamond, before he answered a word. <em>his</em> estimate (allowing for the flaw in the stone) was thirty thousand pounds.</p>
					<p>Having reached that result, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker opened his lips, and put a question: “How did you come by this?” Only six words! But what volumes of meaning in them!</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite began a story. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker opened his lips again, and only said three words, this time. “That won’t do!”</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite began another story. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker wasted no more words on him. He got up, and rang the bell for the servant to show the gentleman out.</p>
					<p>Upon this compulsion, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey made an effort, and came out with a new and amended version of the affair, to the following effect.</p>
					<p>After privately slipping the laudanum into your brandy and water, he wished you good night, and went into his own room. It was the next room to yours; and the two had a door of communication between them. On entering his own room <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey (as he supposed) closed his door. His money troubles kept him awake. He sat, in his dressing-gown and slippers, for nearly an hour, thinking over his position. Just as he was preparing to get into bed, he heard you, talking to yourself, in your own room, and going to the door of communication, found that he had not shut it as he supposed.</p>
					<p>He looked into your room to see what was the matter. He discovered you with the candle in your hand, just leaving your bedchamber. He heard you say to yourself, in a voice quite unlike your own voice, “How do I know? The Indians may be hidden in the house.”</p>
					<p>Up to that time, he had simply supposed himself (in giving you the laudanum) to be helping to make you the victim of a harmless practical joke. It now occurred to him, that the laudanum had taken some effect on you, which had not been foreseen by the doctor, any more than by himself. In the fear of an accident happening he followed you softly to see what you would do.</p>
					<p>He followed you to Miss Verinder’s sitting-room, and saw you go in. You left the door open. He looked through the crevice thus produced, between the door and the post, before he ventured into the room himself.</p>
					<p>In that position, he not only detected you in taking the Diamond out of the drawer⁠—he also detected Miss Verinder, silently watching you from her bedroom, through her open door. His own eyes satisfied him that <em>she</em> saw you take the Diamond, too.</p>
					<p>Before you left the sitting-room again, you hesitated a little. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey took advantage of this hesitation to get back again to his bedroom before you came out, and discovered him. He had barely got back, before you got back too. You saw him (as he supposes) just as he was passing through the door of communication. At any rate, you called to him in a strange, drowsy voice.</p>
					<p>He came back to you. You looked at him in a dull sleepy way. You put the Diamond into his hand. You said to him, “Take it back, Godfrey, to your father’s bank. It’s safe there⁠—it’s not safe here.” You turned away unsteadily, and put on your dressing-gown. You sat down in the large armchair in your room. You said, “I can’t take it back to the bank. My head’s like lead⁠—and I can’t feel my feet under me.” Your head sank on the back of the chair⁠—you heaved a heavy sigh⁠—and you fell asleep.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite went back, with the Diamond, into his own room. His statement is, that he came to no conclusion, at that time⁠—except that he would wait, and see what happened in the morning.</p>
					<p>When the morning came, your language and conduct showed that you were absolutely ignorant of what you had said and done overnight. At the same time, Miss Verinder’s language and conduct showed that she was resolved to say nothing (in mercy to you) on her side. If <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite chose to keep the Diamond, he might do so with perfect impunity. The Moonstone stood between him and ruin. He put the Moonstone into his pocket.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
