<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 67</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-67" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2>
      III
    </h2>
    <h3>
      The Statement of MR. MURTHWAITE (1850)
    </h3>
    <p>
      (In a letter to MR. BRUFF)
    </p>
    <p>
      Have you any recollection, my dear sir, of a semi-savage person whom you
      met out at dinner, in London, in the autumn of ‘forty-eight? Permit me to
      remind you that the person’s name was Murthwaite, and that you and he had
      a long conversation together after dinner. The talk related to an Indian
      Diamond, called the Moonstone, and to a conspiracy then in existence to
      get possession of the gem.
    </p>
    <p>
      Since that time, I have been wandering in Central Asia. Thence I have
      drifted back to the scene of some of my past adventures in the north and
      north-west of India. About a fortnight since, I found myself in a certain
      district or province (but little known to Europeans) called Kattiawar.
    </p>
    <p>
      Here an adventure befell me, in which (incredible as it may appear) you
      are personally interested.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the wild regions of Kattiawar (and how wild they are, you will
      understand, when I tell you that even the husbandmen plough the land,
      armed to the teeth), the population is fanatically devoted to the old
      Hindoo religion—to the ancient worship of Bramah and Vishnu. The few
      Mahometan families, thinly scattered about the villages in the interior,
      are afraid to taste meat of any kind. A Mahometan even suspected of
      killing that sacred animal, the cow, is, as a matter of course, put to
      death without mercy in these parts by the pious Hindoo neighbours who
      surround him. To strengthen the religious enthusiasm of the people, two of
      the most famous shrines of Hindoo pilgrimage are contained within the
      boundaries of Kattiawar. One of them is Dwarka, the birthplace of the god
      Krishna. The other is the sacred city of Somnauth—sacked, and
      destroyed as long since as the eleventh century, by the Mahometan
      conqueror, Mahmoud of Ghizni.
    </p>
    <p>
      Finding myself, for the second time, in these romantic regions, I resolved
      not to leave Kattiawar, without looking once more on the magnificent
      desolation of Somnauth. At the place where I planned to do this, I was (as
      nearly as I could calculate it) some three days distant, journeying on
      foot, from the sacred city.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had not been long on the road, before I noticed that other people—by
      twos and threes—appeared to be travelling in the same direction as
      myself.
    </p>
    <p>
      To such of these as spoke to me, I gave myself out as a Hindoo-Boodhist,
      from a distant province, bound on a pilgrimage. It is needless to say that
      my dress was of the sort to carry out this description. Add, that I know
      the language as well as I know my own, and that I am lean enough and brown
      enough to make it no easy matter to detect my European origin—and
      you will understand that I passed muster with the people readily: not as
      one of themselves, but as a stranger from a distant part of their own
      country.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the second day, the number of Hindoos travelling in my direction had
      increased to fifties and hundreds. On the third day, the throng had
      swollen to thousands; all slowly converging to one point—the city of
      Somnauth.
    </p>
    <p>
      A trifling service which I was able to render to one of my
      fellow-pilgrims, during the third day’s journey, proved the means of
      introducing me to certain Hindoos of the higher caste. From these men I
      learnt that the multitude was on its way to a great religious ceremony,
      which was to take place on a hill at a little distance from Somnauth. The
      ceremony was in honour of the god of the Moon; and it was to be held at
      night.
    </p>
    <p>
      The crowd detained us as we drew near to the place of celebration. By the
      time we reached the hill the moon was high in the heaven. My Hindoo
      friends possessed some special privileges which enabled them to gain
      access to the shrine. They kindly allowed me to accompany them. When we
      arrived at the place, we found the shrine hidden from our view by a
      curtain hung between two magnificent trees. Beneath the trees a flat
      projection of rock jutted out, and formed a species of natural platform.
      Below this, I stood, in company with my Hindoo friends.
    </p>
    <p>
      Looking back down the hill, the view presented the grandest spectacle of
      Nature and Man, in combination, that I have ever seen. The lower slopes of
      the eminence melted imperceptibly into a grassy plain, the place of the
      meeting of three rivers. On one side, the graceful winding of the waters
      stretched away, now visible, now hidden by trees, as far as the eye could
      see. On the other, the waveless ocean slept in the calm of the night.
      People this lovely scene with tens of thousands of human creatures, all
      dressed in white, stretching down the sides of the hill, overflowing into
      the plain, and fringing the nearer banks of the winding rivers. Light this
      halt of the pilgrims by the wild red flames of cressets and torches,
      streaming up at intervals from every part of the innumerable throng.
      Imagine the moonlight of the East, pouring in unclouded glory over all—and
      you will form some idea of the view that met me when I looked forth from
      the summit of the hill.
    </p>
    <p>
      A strain of plaintive music, played on stringed instruments, and flutes,
      recalled my attention to the hidden shrine.
    </p>
    <p>
      I turned, and saw on the rocky platform the figures of three men. In the
      central figure of the three I recognised the man to whom I had spoken in
      England, when the Indians appeared on the terrace at Lady Verinder’s
      house. The other two who had been his companions on that occasion were no
      doubt his companions also on this.
    </p>
    <p>
      One of the spectators, near whom I was standing, saw me start. In a
      whisper, he explained to me the apparition of the three figures on the
      platform of rock.
    </p>
    <p>
      They were Brahmins (he said) who had forfeited their caste in the service
      of the god. The god had commanded that their purification should be the
      purification by pilgrimage. On that night, the three men were to part. In
      three separate directions, they were to set forth as pilgrims to the
      shrines of India. Never more were they to look on each other’s faces.
      Never more were they to rest on their wanderings, from the day which
      witnessed their separation, to the day which witnessed their death.
    </p>
    <p>
      As those words were whispered to me, the plaintive music ceased. The three
      men prostrated themselves on the rock, before the curtain which hid the
      shrine. They rose—they looked on one another—they embraced.
      Then they descended separately among the people. The people made way for
      them in dead silence. In three different directions I saw the crowd part,
      at one and the same moment. Slowly the grand white mass of the people
      closed together again. The track of the doomed men through the ranks of
      their fellow mortals was obliterated. We saw them no more.
    </p>
    <p>
      A new strain of music, loud and jubilant, rose from the hidden shrine. The
      crowd around me shuddered, and pressed together.
    </p>
    <p>
      The curtain between the trees was drawn aside, and the shrine was
      disclosed to view.
    </p>
    <p>
      There, raised high on a throne—seated on his typical antelope, with
      his four arms stretching towards the four corners of the earth—there,
      soared above us, dark and awful in the mystic light of heaven, the god of
      the Moon. And there, in the forehead of the deity, gleamed the yellow
      Diamond, whose splendour had last shone on me in England, from the bosom
      of a woman’s dress!
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes! after the lapse of eight centuries, the Moonstone looks forth once
      more, over the walls of the sacred city in which its story first began.
      How it has found its way back to its wild native land—by what
      accident, or by what crime, the Indians regained possession of their
      sacred gem, may be in your knowledge, but is not in mine. You have lost
      sight of it in England, and (if I know anything of this people) you have
      lost sight of it for ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      So the years pass, and repeat each other; so the same events revolve in
      the cycles of time. What will be the next adventures of the Moonstone? Who
      can tell?
    </p>
    <div style="height: 6em;">
      <br><br><br><br><br><br>
    </div>
<pre xml:space="preserve">




End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Moonstone, by Wilkie Collins

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MOONSTONE ***

***** This file should be named 155-h.htm or 155-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/155/

Produced by John Hamm and David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”
 
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


</pre>
  

</body></html>
</section></body></html>
