<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="second-period" epub:type="part">
			<section id="third-narrative" epub:type="division">
				<section id="chapter-2-3-1" epub:type="chapter">
					<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h2>
					<p>In the spring of the year <time datetime="1849">eighteen hundred and forty-nine</time> I was wandering in the East, and had then recently altered the travelling plans which I had laid out some months before, and which I had communicated to my lawyer and my banker in London.</p>
					<p>This change made it necessary for me to send one of my servants to obtain my letters and remittances from the English consul in a certain city, which was no longer included as one of my resting-places in my new travelling scheme. The man was to join me again at an appointed place and time. An accident, for which he was not responsible, delayed him on his errand. For a week I and my people waited, encamped on the borders of a desert. At the end of that time the missing man made his appearance, with the money and the letters, at the entrance of my tent.</p>
					<p>“I am afraid I bring you bad news, sir,” he said, and pointed to one of the letters, which had a mourning border round it, and the address on which was in the handwriting of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff.</p>
					<p>I know nothing, in a case of this kind, so unendurable as suspense. The letter with the mourning border was the letter that I opened first.</p>
					<p>It informed me that my father was dead, and that I was heir to his great fortune. The wealth which had thus fallen into my hands brought its responsibilities with it, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff entreated me to lose no time in returning to England.</p>
					<p>By daybreak the next morning, I was on my way back to my own country.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>The picture presented of me, by my old friend Betteredge, at the time of my departure from England, is (as I think) a little overdrawn. He has, in his own quaint way, interpreted seriously one of his young mistress’s many satirical references to my foreign education; and has persuaded himself that he actually saw those French, German, and Italian sides to my character, which my lively cousin only professed to discover in jest, and which never had any real existence, except in our good Betteredge’s own brain. But, barring this drawback, I am bound to own that he has stated no more than the truth in representing me as wounded to the heart by Rachel’s treatment, and as leaving England in the first keenness of suffering caused by the bitterest disappointment of my life.</p>
					<p>I went abroad, resolved⁠—if change and absence could help me⁠—to forget her. It is, I am persuaded, no true view of human nature which denies that change and absence <em>do</em> help a man under these circumstances; they force his attention away from the exclusive contemplation of his own sorrow. I never forgot her; but the pang of remembrance lost its worst bitterness, little by little, as time, distance, and novelty interposed themselves more and more effectually between Rachel and me.</p>
					<p>On the other hand, it is no less certain that, with the act of turning homeward, the remedy which had gained its ground so steadily, began now, just as steadily, to drop back. The nearer I drew to the country which she inhabited, and to the prospect of seeing her again, the more irresistibly her influence began to recover its hold on me. On leaving England she was the last person in the world whose name I would have suffered to pass my lips. On returning to England, she was the first person I inquired after, when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff and I met again.</p>
					<p>I was informed, of course, of all that had happened in my absence; in other words, of all that has been related here in continuation of Betteredge’s narrative⁠—one circumstance only being excepted. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff did not, at that time, feel himself at liberty to inform me of the motives which had privately influenced Rachel and Godfrey Ablewhite in recalling the marriage promise, on either side. I troubled him with no embarrassing questions on this delicate subject. It was relief enough to me, after the jealous disappointment caused by hearing that she had ever contemplated being Godfrey’s wife, to know that reflection had convinced her of acting rashly, and that she had effected her own release from her marriage engagement.</p>
					<p>Having heard the story of the past, my next inquiries (still inquiries after Rachel!) advanced naturally to the present time. Under whose care had she been placed after leaving <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff’s house? and where was she living now?</p>
					<p>She was living under the care of a widowed sister of the late Sir John Verinder⁠—one <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Merridew⁠—whom her mother’s executors had requested to act as guardian, and who had accepted the proposal. They were reported to me as getting on together admirably well, and as being now established, for the season, in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Merridew’s house in Portland Place.</p>
					<p>Half an hour after receiving this information, I was on my way to Portland Place⁠—without having had the courage to own it to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff!</p>
					<p>The man who answered the door was not sure whether Miss Verinder was at home or not. I sent him upstairs with my card, as the speediest way of setting the question at rest. The man came down again with an impenetrable face, and informed me that Miss Verinder was out.</p>
					<p>I might have suspected other people of purposely denying themselves to me. But it was impossible to suspect Rachel. I left word that I would call again at six o’clock that evening.</p>
					<p>At six o’clock I was informed for the second time that Miss Verinder was not at home. Had any message been left for me. No message had been left for me. Had Miss Verinder not received my card? The servant begged my pardon⁠—Miss Verinder <em>had</em> received it.</p>
					<p>The inference was too plain to be resisted. Rachel declined to see me.</p>
					<p>On my side, I declined to be treated in this way, without making an attempt, at least, to discover a reason for it. I sent up my name to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Merridew, and requested her to favour me with a personal interview at any hour which it might be most convenient to her to name.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Merridew made no difficulty about receiving me at once. I was shown into a comfortable little sitting-room, and found myself in the presence of a comfortable little elderly lady. She was so good as to feel great regret and much surprise, entirely on my account. She was at the same time, however, not in a position to offer me any explanation, or to press Rachel on a matter which appeared to relate to a question of private feeling alone. This was said over and over again, with a polite patience that nothing could tire; and this was all I gained by applying to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Merridew.</p>
					<p>My last chance was to write to Rachel. My servant took a letter to her the next day, with strict instructions to wait for an answer.</p>
					<p>The answer came back, literally in one sentence.</p>
					<p>“Miss Verinder begs to decline entering into any correspondence with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake.”</p>
					<p>Fond as I was of her, I felt indignantly the insult offered to me in that reply. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff came in to speak to me on business, before I had recovered possession of myself. I dismissed the business on the spot, and laid the whole case before him. He proved to be as incapable of enlightening me as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Merridew herself. I asked him if any slander had been spoken of me in Rachel’s hearing. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff was not aware of any slander of which I was the object. Had she referred to me in any way while she was staying under <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff’s roof? Never. Had she not so much as asked, during all my long absence, whether I was living or dead? No such question had ever passed her lips. I took out of my pocketbook the letter which poor Lady Verinder had written to me from Frizinghall, on the day when I left her house in Yorkshire. And I pointed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff’s attention to these two sentences in it:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p>“The valuable assistance which you rendered to the inquiry after the lost jewel is still an unpardoned offence, in the present dreadful state of Rachel’s mind. Moving blindfold in this matter, you have added to the burden of anxiety which she has had to bear, by innocently threatening her secret with discovery through your exertions.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>“Is it possible,” I asked, “that the feeling towards me which is there described, is as bitter as ever against me now?”</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff looked unaffectedly distressed.</p>
					<p>“If you insist on an answer,” he said, “I own I can place no other interpretation on her conduct than that.”</p>
					<p>I rang the bell, and directed my servant to pack my portmanteau, and to send out for a railway guide. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff asked, in astonishment, what I was going to do.</p>
					<p>“I am going to Yorkshire,” I answered, “by the next train.”</p>
					<p>“May I ask for what purpose?”</p>
					<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff, the assistance I innocently rendered to the inquiry after the Diamond was an unpardoned offence, in Rachel’s mind, nearly a year since; and it remains an unpardoned offence still. I won’t accept that position! I am determined to find out the secret of her silence towards her mother, and her enmity towards me. If time, pains, and money can do it, I will lay my hand on the thief who took the Moonstone!”</p>
					<p>The worthy old gentleman attempted to remonstrate⁠—to induce me to listen to reason⁠—to do his duty towards me, in short. I was deaf to everything that he could urge. No earthly consideration would, at that moment, have shaken the resolution that was in me.</p>
					<p>“I shall take up the inquiry again,” I went on, “at the point where I dropped it; and I shall follow it onwards, step by step, till I come to the present time. There are missing links in the evidence, as <em>I</em> left it, which Gabriel Betteredge can supply, and to Gabriel Betteredge I go!”</p>
					<p>Towards sunset that evening I stood again on the well-remembered terrace, and looked once more at the peaceful old country house. The gardener was the first person whom I saw in the deserted grounds. He had left Betteredge, an hour since, sunning himself in the customary corner of the back yard. I knew it well; and I said I would go and seek him myself.</p>
					<p>I walked round by the familiar paths and passages, and looked in at the open gate of the yard.</p>
					<p>There he was⁠—the dear old friend of the happy days that were never to come again⁠—there he was in the old corner, on the old beehive chair, with his pipe in his mouth, and his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Robinson Crusoe</i> on his lap, and his two friends, the dogs, dozing on either side of him! In the position in which I stood, my shadow was projected in front of me by the last slanting rays of the sun. Either the dogs saw it, or their keen scent informed them of my approach; they started up with a growl. Starting in his turn, the old man quieted them by a word, and then shaded his failing eyes with his hand, and looked inquiringly at the figure at the gate.</p>
					<p>My own eyes were full of tears. I was obliged to wait a moment before I could trust myself to speak to him.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
