<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="second-narrative" id="chapter-2-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
			<p>The prominent personage among the guests at the dinner party I found to be <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite.</p>
			<p>On his appearance in England, after his wanderings, society had been greatly interested in the traveller, as a man who had passed through many dangerous adventures, and who had escaped to tell the tale. He had now announced his intention of returning to the scene of his exploits, and of penetrating into regions left still unexplored. This magnificent indifference to placing his safety in peril for the second time, revived the flagging interest of the worshippers in the hero. The law of chances was clearly against his escaping on this occasion. It is not every day that we can meet an eminent person at dinner, and feel that there is a reasonable prospect of the news of his murder being the news that we hear of him next.</p>
			<p>When the gentlemen were left by themselves in the dining-room, I found myself sitting next to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite. The guests present being all English, it is needless to say that, as soon as the wholesome check exercised by the presence of the ladies was removed, the conversation turned on politics as a necessary result.</p>
			<p>In respect to this all-absorbing national topic, I happen to be one of the most un-English Englishmen living. As a general rule, political talk appears to me to be of all talk the most dreary and the most profitless. Glancing at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite, when the bottles had made their first round of the table, I found that he was apparently of my way of thinking. He was doing it very dexterously⁠—with all possible consideration for the feelings of his host⁠—but it is not the less certain that he was composing himself for a nap. It struck me as an experiment worth attempting, to try whether a judicious allusion to the subject of the Moonstone would keep him awake, and, if it did, to see what <em>he</em> thought of the last new complication in the Indian conspiracy, as revealed in the prosaic precincts of my office.</p>
			<p>“If I am not mistaken, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite,” I began, “you were acquainted with the late Lady Verinder, and you took some interest in the strange succession of events which ended in the loss of the Moonstone?”</p>
			<p>The eminent traveller did me the honour of waking up in an instant, and asking me who I was.</p>
			<p>I informed him of my professional connection with the Herncastle family, not forgetting the curious position which I had occupied towards the Colonel and his Diamond in the bygone time.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite shifted round in his chair, so as to put the rest of the company behind him (Conservatives and Liberals alike), and concentrated his whole attention on plain <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff, of Gray’s Inn Square.</p>
			<p>“Have you heard anything, lately, of the Indians?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“I have every reason to believe,” I answered, “that one of them had an interview with me, in my office, yesterday.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite was not an easy man to astonish; but that last answer of mine completely staggered him. I described what had happened to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker, and what had happened to myself, exactly as I have described it here. “It is clear that the Indian’s parting inquiry had an object,” I added. “Why should he be so anxious to know the time at which a borrower of money is usually privileged to pay the money back?”</p>
			<p>“Is it possible that you don’t see his motive, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff?”</p>
			<p>“I am ashamed of my stupidity, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite⁠—but I certainly don’t see it.”</p>
			<p>The great traveller became quite interested in sounding the immense vacuity of my dullness to its lowest depths.</p>
			<p>“Let me ask you one question,” he said. “In what position does the conspiracy to seize the Moonstone now stand?”</p>
			<p>“I can’t say,” I answered. “The Indian plot is a mystery to me.”</p>
			<p>“The Indian plot, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff, can only be a mystery to you, because you have never seriously examined it. Shall we run it over together, from the time when you drew Colonel Herncastle’s Will, to the time when the Indian called at your office? In your position, it may be of very serious importance to the interests of Miss Verinder, that you should be able to take a clear view of this matter in case of need. Tell me, bearing that in mind, whether you will penetrate the Indian’s motive for yourself? or whether you wish me to save you the trouble of making any inquiry into it?”</p>
			<p>It is needless to say that I thoroughly appreciated the practical purpose which I now saw that he had in view, and that the first of the two alternatives was the alternative I chose.</p>
			<p>“Very good,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite. “We will take the question of the ages of the three Indians first. I can testify that they all look much about the same age⁠—and you can decide for yourself, whether the man whom you saw was, or was not, in the prime of life. Not forty, you think? My idea too. We will say not forty. Now look back to the time when Colonel Herncastle came to England, and when you were concerned in the plan he adopted to preserve his life. I don’t want you to count the years. I will only say, it is clear that these present Indians, at their age, must be the successors of three other Indians (high caste Brahmins all of them, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff, when they left their native country!) who followed the Colonel to these shores. Very well. These present men of ours have succeeded to the men who were here before them. If they had only done that, the matter would not have been worth inquiring into. But they have done more. They have succeeded to the organisation which their predecessors established in this country. Don’t start! The organisation is a very trumpery affair, according to our ideas, I have no doubt. I should reckon it up as including the command of money; the services, when needed, of that shady sort of Englishman, who lives in the byways of foreign life in London; and, lastly, the secret sympathy of such few men of their own country, and (formerly, at least) of their own religion, as happen to be employed in ministering to some of the multitudinous wants of this great city. Nothing very formidable, as you see! But worth notice at starting, because we <em>may</em> find occasion to refer to this modest little Indian organisation as we go on. Having now cleared the ground, I am going to ask you a question; and I expect your experience to answer it. What was the event which gave the Indians their first chance of seizing the Diamond?”</p>
			<p>I understood the allusion to my experience.</p>
			<p>“The first chance they got,” I replied, “was clearly offered to them by Colonel Herncastle’s death. They would be aware of his death, I suppose, as a matter of course?”</p>
			<p>“As a matter of course. And his death, as you say, gave them their first chance. Up to that time the Moonstone was safe in the strongroom of the bank. You drew the Colonel’s Will leaving his jewel to his niece; and the Will was proved in the usual way. As a lawyer, you can be at no loss to know what course the Indians would take (under English advice) after <em>that</em>.”</p>
			<p>“They would provide themselves with a copy of the Will from Doctors’ Commons,” I said.</p>
			<p>“Exactly. One or other of those shady Englishmen to whom I have alluded, would get them the copy you have described. That copy would inform them that the Moonstone was bequeathed to the daughter of Lady Verinder, and that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blake the elder, or some person appointed by him, was to place it in her hands. You will agree with me that the necessary information about persons in the position of Lady Verinder and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blake, would be perfectly easy information to obtain. The one difficulty for the Indians would be to decide whether they should make their attempt on the Diamond when it was in course of removal from the keeping of the bank, or whether they should wait until it was taken down to Yorkshire to Lady Verinder’s house. The second way would be manifestly the safest way⁠—and there you have the explanation of the appearance of the Indians at Frizinghall, disguised as jugglers, and waiting their time. In London, it is needless to say, they had their organisation at their disposal to keep them informed of events. Two men would do it. One to follow anybody who went from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blake’s house to the bank. And one to treat the lower men servants with beer, and to hear the news of the house. These commonplace precautions would readily inform them that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake had been to the bank, and that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake was the only person in the house who was going to visit Lady Verinder. What actually followed upon that discovery, you remember, no doubt, quite as correctly as I do.”</p>
			<p>I remembered that Franklin Blake had detected one of the spies, in the street⁠—that he had, in consequence, advanced the time of his arrival in Yorkshire by some hours⁠—and that (thanks to old Betteredge’s excellent advice) he had lodged the Diamond in the bank at Frizinghall, before the Indians were so much as prepared to see him in the neighbourhood. All perfectly clear so far. But the Indians being ignorant of the precautions thus taken, how was it that they had made no attempt on Lady Verinder’s house (in which they must have supposed the Diamond to be) through the whole of the interval that elapsed before Rachel’s birthday?</p>
			<p>In putting this difficulty to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite, I thought it right to add that I had heard of the little boy, and the drop of ink, and the rest of it, and that any explanation based on the theory of clairvoyance was an explanation which would carry no conviction whatever with it, to <em>my</em> mind.</p>
			<p>“Nor to mine either,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite. “The clairvoyance in this case is simply a development of the romantic side of the Indian character. It would be refreshment and an encouragement to those men⁠—quite inconceivable, I grant you, to the English mind⁠—to surround their wearisome and perilous errand in this country with a certain halo of the marvellous and the supernatural. Their boy is unquestionably a sensitive subject to the mesmeric influence⁠—and, under that influence, he has no doubt reflected what was already in the mind of the person mesmerising him. I have tested the theory of clairvoyance⁠—and I have never found the manifestations get beyond that point. The Indians don’t investigate the matter in this way; the Indians look upon their boy as a seer of things invisible to their eyes⁠—and, I repeat, in that marvel they find the source of a new interest in the purpose that unites them. I only notice this as offering a curious view of human character, which must be quite new to you. We have nothing whatever to do with clairvoyance, or with mesmerism, or with anything else that is hard of belief to a practical man, in the inquiry that we are now pursuing. My object in following the Indian plot, step by step, is to trace results back, by rational means, to natural causes. Have I succeeded to your satisfaction so far?”</p>
			<p>“Not a doubt of it, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite! I am waiting, however, with some anxiety, to hear the rational explanation of the difficulty which I have just had the honour of submitting to you.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite smiled. “It’s the easiest difficulty to deal with of all,” he said. “Permit me to begin by admitting your statement of the case as a perfectly correct one. The Indians were undoubtedly not aware of what <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake had done with the Diamond⁠—for we find them making their first mistake, on the first night of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blake’s arrival at his aunt’s house.”</p>
			<p>“Their first mistake?” I repeated.</p>
			<p>“Certainly! The mistake of allowing themselves to be surprised, lurking about the terrace at night, by Gabriel Betteredge. However, they had the merit of seeing for themselves that they had taken a false step⁠—for, as you say, again, with plenty of time at their disposal, they never came near the house for weeks afterwards.”</p>
			<p>“Why, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite? That’s what I want to know! Why?”</p>
			<p>“Because no Indian, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff, ever runs an unnecessary risk. The clause you drew in Colonel Herncastle’s Will, informed them (didn’t it?) that the Moonstone was to pass absolutely into Miss Verinder’s possession on her birthday. Very well. Tell me which was the safest course for men in their position? To make their attempt on the Diamond while it was under the control of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake, who had shown already that he could suspect and outwit them? Or to wait till the Diamond was at the disposal of a young girl, who would innocently delight in wearing the magnificent jewel at every possible opportunity? Perhaps you want a proof that my theory is correct? Take the conduct of the Indians themselves as the proof. They appeared at the house, after waiting all those weeks, on Miss Verinder’s birthday; and they were rewarded for the patient accuracy of their calculations by seeing the Moonstone in the bosom of her dress! When I heard the story of the Colonel and the Diamond, later in the evening, I felt so sure about the risk <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Franklin Blake had run (they would have certainly attacked him, if he had not happened to ride back to Lady Verinder’s in the company of other people); and I was so strongly convinced of the worse risk still, in store for Miss Verinder, that I recommended following the Colonel’s plan, and destroying the identity of the gem by having it cut into separate stones. How its extraordinary disappearance that night, made my advice useless, and utterly defeated the Hindu plot⁠—and how all further action on the part of the Indians was paralysed the next day by their confinement in prison as rogues and vagabonds⁠—you know as well as I do. The first act in the conspiracy closes there. Before we go on to the second, may I ask whether I have met your difficulty, with an explanation which is satisfactory to the mind of a practical man?”</p>
			<p>It was impossible to deny that he had met my difficulty fairly; thanks to his superior knowledge of the Indian character⁠—and thanks to his not having had hundreds of other wills to think of since Colonel Herncastle’s time!</p>
			<p>“So far, so good,” resumed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite. “The first chance the Indians had of seizing the Diamond was a chance lost, on the day when they were committed to the prison at Frizinghall. When did the second chance offer itself? The second chance offered itself⁠—as I am in a condition to prove⁠—while they were still in confinement.”</p>
			<p>He took out his pocketbook, and opened it at a particular leaf, before he went on.</p>
			<p>“I was staying,” he resumed, “with some friends at Frizinghall, at the time. A day or two before the Indians were set free (on a Monday, I think), the governor of the prison came to me with a letter. It had been left for the Indians by one <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Macann, of whom they had hired the lodging in which they lived; and it had been delivered at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Macann’s door, in ordinary course of post, on the previous morning. The prison authorities had noticed that the postmark was ‘Lambeth,’ and that the address on the outside, though expressed in correct English, was, in form, oddly at variance with the customary method of directing a letter. On opening it, they had found the contents to be written in a foreign language, which they rightly guessed at as Hindustani. Their object in coming to me was, of course, to have the letter translated to them. I took a copy in my pocketbook of the original, and of my translation⁠—and there they are at your service.”</p>
			<p>He handed me the open pocketbook. The address on the letter was the first thing copied. It was all written in one paragraph, without any attempt at punctuation, thus: “To the three Indian men living with the lady called Macann at Frizinghall in Yorkshire.” The Hindu characters followed; and the English translation appeared at the end, expressed in these mysterious words:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“In the name of the Regent of the Night, whose seat is on the Antelope, whose arms embrace the four corners of the earth.</p>
				<p>“Brothers, turn your faces to the south, and come to me in the street of many noises, which leads down to the muddy river.</p>
				<p>“The reason is this.</p>
				<p>“My own eyes have seen it.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>There the letter ended, without either date or signature. I handed it back to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite, and owned that this curious specimen of Hindu correspondence rather puzzled me.</p>
			<p>“I can explain the first sentence to you,” he said; “and the conduct of the Indians themselves will explain the rest. The god of the moon is represented, in the Hindu mythology, as a four-armed deity, seated on an antelope; and one of his titles is the regent of the night. Here, then, to begin with, is something which looks suspiciously like an indirect reference to the Moonstone. Now, let us see what the Indians did, after the prison authorities had allowed them to receive their letter. On the very day when they were set free they went at once to the railway station, and took their places in the first train that started for London. We all thought it a pity at Frizinghall that their proceedings were not privately watched. But, after Lady Verinder had dismissed the police-officer, and had stopped all further inquiry into the loss of the Diamond, no one else could presume to stir in the matter. The Indians were free to go to London, and to London they went. What was the next news we heard of them, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff?”</p>
			<p>“They were annoying <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker,” I answered, “by loitering about the house at Lambeth.”</p>
			<p>“Did you read the report of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker’s application to the magistrate?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“In the course of his statement he referred, if you remember, to a foreign workman in his employment, whom he had just dismissed on suspicion of attempted theft, and whom he also distrusted as possibly acting in collusion with the Indians who had annoyed him. The inference is pretty plain, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff, as to who wrote that letter which puzzled you just now, and as to which of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker’s Oriental treasures the workman had attempted to steal.”</p>
			<p>The inference (as I hastened to acknowledge) was too plain to need being pointed out. I had never doubted that the Moonstone had found its way into <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker’s hands, at the time <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite alluded to. My only question had been, How had the Indians discovered the circumstance? This question (the most difficult to deal with of all, as I had thought) had now received its answer, like the rest. Lawyer as I was, I began to feel that I might trust <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite to lead me blindfold through the last windings of the labyrinth, along which he had guided me thus far. I paid him the compliment of telling him this, and found my little concession very graciously received.</p>
			<p>“You shall give me a piece of information in your turn before we go on,” he said. “Somebody must have taken the Moonstone from Yorkshire to London. And somebody must have raised money on it, or it would never have been in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker’s possession. Has there been any discovery made of who that person was?”</p>
			<p>“None that I know of.”</p>
			<p>“There was a story (was there not?) about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite. I am told he is an eminent philanthropist⁠—which is decidedly against him, to begin with.”</p>
			<p>I heartily agreed in this with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite. At the same time, I felt bound to inform him (without, it is needless to say, mentioning Miss Verinder’s name) that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Ablewhite had been cleared of all suspicion, on evidence which I could answer for as entirely beyond dispute.</p>
			<p>“Very well,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murthwaite, quietly, “let us leave it to time to clear the matter up. In the meanwhile, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff, we must get back again to the Indians, on your account. Their journey to London simply ended in their becoming the victims of another defeat. The loss of their second chance of seizing the Diamond is mainly attributable, as I think, to the cunning and foresight of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker⁠—who doesn’t stand at the top of the prosperous and ancient profession of usury for nothing! By the prompt dismissal of the man in his employment, he deprived the Indians of the assistance which their confederate would have rendered them in getting into the house. By the prompt transport of the Moonstone to his banker’s, he took the conspirators by surprise before they were prepared with a new plan for robbing him. How the Indians, in this latter case, suspected what he had done, and how they contrived to possess themselves of his banker’s receipt, are events too recent to need dwelling on. Let it be enough to say that they know the Moonstone to be once more out of their reach; deposited (under the general description of ‘a valuable of great price’) in a banker’s strong room. Now, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff, what is their third chance of seizing the Diamond? and when will it come?”</p>
			<p>As the question passed his lips, I penetrated the motive of the Indian’s visit to my office at last!</p>
			<p>“I see it!” I exclaimed. “The Indians take it for granted, as we do, that the Moonstone has been pledged; and they want to be certainly informed of the earliest period at which the pledge can be redeemed⁠—because that will be the earliest period at which the Diamond can be removed from the safe keeping of the bank!”</p>
			<p>“I told you you would find it out for yourself, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff, if I only gave you a fair chance. In a year from the time when the Moonstone was pledged, the Indians will be on the watch for their third chance. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker’s own lips have told them how long they will have to wait, and your respectable authority has satisfied them that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luker has spoken the truth. When do we suppose, at a rough guess, that the Diamond found its way into the moneylender’s hands?”</p>
			<p>“Towards the end of last June,” I answered, “as well as I can reckon it.”</p>
			<p>“And we are now in the year ’forty-eight. Very good. If the unknown person who has pledged the Moonstone can redeem it in a year, the jewel will be in that person’s possession again at the end of <time datetime="1849-06">June, ’forty-nine</time>. I shall be thousands of miles from England and English news at that date. But it may be worth <em>your</em> while to take a note of it, and to arrange to be in London at the time.”</p>
			<p>“You think something serious will happen?” I said.</p>
			<p>“I think I shall be safer,” he answered, “among the fiercest fanatics of Central Asia than I should be if I crossed the door of the bank with the Moonstone in my pocket. The Indians have been defeated twice running, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruff. It’s my firm belief that they won’t be defeated a third time.”</p>
			<p>Those were the last words he said on the subject. The coffee came in; the guests rose, and dispersed themselves about the room; and we joined the ladies of the dinner-party upstairs.</p>
			<p>I made a note of the date, and it may not be amiss if I close my narrative by repeating that note here:</p>
			<p><em><time datetime="1849-06">June, ’forty-nine</time>. Expect news of the Indians, toward the end of the month</em>.</p>
			<p>And that done, I hand the pen, which I have now no further claim to use, to the writer who follows me next.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
