<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 65</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-65" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2>
      I
    </h2>
    <h3>
      The Statement of SERGEANT CUFF’S MAN (1849)
    </h3>
    <p>
      On the twenty-seventh of June last, I received instructions from Sergeant
      Cuff to follow three men; suspected of murder, and described as Indians.
      They had been seen on the Tower Wharf that morning, embarking on board the
      steamer bound for Rotterdam.
    </p>
    <p>
      I left London by a steamer belonging to another company, which sailed on
      the morning of Thursday the twenty-eighth. Arriving at Rotterdam, I
      succeeded in finding the commander of the Wednesday’s steamer. He informed
      me that the Indians had certainly been passengers on board his vessel—but
      as far as Gravesend only. Off that place, one of the three had inquired at
      what time they would reach Calais. On being informed that the steamer was
      bound to Rotterdam, the spokesman of the party expressed the greatest
      surprise and distress at the mistake which he and his two friends had
      made. They were all willing (he said) to sacrifice their passage money, if
      the commander of the steamer would only put them ashore. Commiserating
      their position, as foreigners in a strange land, and knowing no reason for
      detaining them, the commander signalled for a shore boat, and the three
      men left the vessel.
    </p>
    <p>
      This proceeding of the Indians having been plainly resolved on beforehand,
      as a means of preventing their being traced, I lost no time in returning
      to England. I left the steamer at Gravesend, and discovered that the
      Indians had gone from that place to London. Thence, I again traced them as
      having left for Plymouth. Inquiries made at Plymouth proved that they had
      sailed, forty-eight hours previously, in the BEWLEY CASTLE, East Indiaman,
      bound direct to Bombay.
    </p>
    <p>
      On receiving this intelligence, Sergeant Cuff caused the authorities at
      Bombay to be communicated with, overland—so that the vessel might be
      boarded by the police immediately on her entering the port. This step
      having been taken, my connection with the matter came to an end. I have
      heard nothing more of it since that time.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0065" id="link2H_4_0065">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br><br><br><br>
    </div>
</section></body></html>
