<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Eplilogue 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="epilogue" epub:type="epilogue">
			<section id="epilogue-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"> The Statement of <em>The Captain</em> (1849) </span>
				</h2>
				<p>I am requested by Sergeant Cuff to set in writing certain facts, concerning three men (believed to be Hindus) who were passengers, last summer, in the ship <em>Bewley Castle</em>, bound for Bombay direct, under my command.</p>
				<p>The Hindus joined us at Plymouth. On the passage out I heard no complaint of their conduct. They were berthed in the forward part of the vessel. I had but few occasions myself of personally noticing them.</p>
				<p>In the latter part of the voyage, we had the misfortune to be becalmed for three days and nights, off the coast of India. I have not got the ship’s journal to refer to, and I cannot now call to mind the latitude and longitude. As to our position, therefore, I am only able to state generally that the currents drifted us in towards the land, and that when the wind found us again, we reached our port in twenty-four hours afterwards.</p>
				<p>The discipline of a ship (as all seafaring persons know) becomes relaxed in a long calm. The discipline of my ship became relaxed. Certain gentlemen among the passengers got some of the smaller boats lowered, and amused themselves by rowing about, and swimming, when the sun at evening time was cool enough to let them divert themselves in that way. The boats when done with ought to have been slung up again in their places. Instead of this they were left moored to the ship’s side. What with the heat, and what with the vexation of the weather, neither officers nor men seemed to be in heart for their duty while the calm lasted.</p>
				<p>On the third night, nothing unusual was heard or seen by the watch on deck. When the morning came, the smallest of the boats was missing⁠—and the three Hindus were next reported to be missing, too.</p>
				<p>If these men had stolen the boat shortly after dark (which I have no doubt they did), we were near enough to the land to make it vain to send in pursuit of them, when the discovery was made in the morning. I have no doubt they got ashore, in that calm weather (making all due allowance for fatigue and clumsy rowing), before daybreak.</p>
				<p>On reaching our port I there learnt, for the first time, the reason these passengers had for seizing their opportunity of escaping from the ship. I could only make the same statement to the authorities which I have made here. They considered me to blame for allowing the discipline of the vessel to be relaxed. I have expressed my regret on this score to them, and to my owners.</p>
				<p>Since that time, nothing has been heard to my knowledge of the three Hindus. I have no more to add to what is here written.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
